---
layout:     post
title:      "Day 6 - Lesson 4"
subtitle:   "Climbing/Descending/Medium level turns"
date:       2015-07-25
author:     "Owain Abraham-Williams"
---

Since my last lesson I've bought my very own knee-board. A knee-board is very similar to a
conventional clip-board, but it has a strap on the back that goes round your leg so you
can write on it while talking to the air traffic controllers without fear of it falling
off your lap. The one I went for is called a [Pooley's CB-8](//www.pooleys.com/prod_detail.cfm?product_id=115).
As well as a clip to hold paper and loops on the side to hold your pencils, it can also
flip open and inside there are 4 mini clear plastic pockets. I thought this may come in
useful when I start needing airport diagrams for other airfields.

I also bought volume two ([Air Law and Meteorology](//www.pooleys.com/prod_detail.cfm?product_id=810)),
volume six ([Human Factors and Pilot Performance](//www.pooleys.com/prod_detail.cfm?product_id=6))
and the EASA supplement ([Operational Procedures](//www.pooleys.com/prod_detail.cfm?product_id=2426))
of the Air Pilot's Manuals. I don't intend to take the exams yet, but I thought it wise to
start revising as you need a 75% pass mark on each exam.

## First Radio Call

Today we were in G-GFCB again, I was happy about this because I had not felt very
confident after the last lesson so hoped some consistency in the plane I was flying would
help. Derek asked me if I wanted to do the radio calls today, I'd been reading the CAA's
Radiotelephony Manual ([CAP 413](https://www.caa.co.uk/cap413)) so felt confident I could
handle this, first we listened into the ATIS and then it was my turn to talk to the tower.
The first call was easy:

> Bristol Tower, Golf Golf Foxtrot Charlie Bravo, Piper PA28, parked south side of airport
> with information Lima, QNH one zero one seven, request start-up.

To which the reply came at an incredible speed:

> Golf Golf Foxtrot Charlie Bravo, tower, good afternoon, start-up approved.

All fine so far, I started the engine and then it was time to call the tower for the taxi
clearance. Calling them wasn't an issue, it was simple, just:

> Bristol Tower, Golf Charlie Bravo, request taxi.

But the reply from the tower threw me:

> Golf Charlie Bravo, taxi holding point Hotel X-ray for runway two seven QNH one zero one
> seven.

I just wasn't prepared to write it down. Listening back to it now it seems so simple, but
my mind just went blank. I sat there for a few moments hoping for divine intervention, but
when that didn't come I realised I needed to do something. So I gingerly pressed the
intercom button again and said:

> Say again

I'm not sure the controller could believe what he was hearing. He'd just given the
simplest of taxiing instructions and the pilot was asking him to repeat himself. He calmly
repeated the instruction. This time I just about had the wherewithal to write some of it
down on my knee-board, I repeated my taxi clearance:

> Taxi holding point Hotel X-ray, runway two seven, Golf Charlie Bravo.

But I'd missed out the QNH, the controller reminded me of this and I repeated it back to
him. This had put me in nervous state and couldn't work out what to do next. Derek asked
me but I just looked at him blankly and shrugged. Then I suggested he call for taxi
clearance, but we already had this. I took a deep breath, got a grip of my senses and
worked out we needed to start taxiing towards the holding point. Break off, power at 1,200
RPM, we started moving, what a relief!

* First radio call
* Climbing and descending
* Forgetting carburettor heat
* Turns
* Climbing turns
* Flying high enough to see over clouds
* Descending turns
* Rudder
* Re-setting DI with magnetic compass
* Turning onto headings
* Missing headings when they are between numbered points
* Getting better at carburettor heat!
* Extending downwind to leave space for departing aircraft

#### TOTAL FLYING HOURS = 4.5