---
layout:     post
title:      "Day 9 - Lesson 6"
subtitle:   "Slow flight/Stalling/Spin avoidance"
date:       2015-08-15
author:     "Owain Abraham-Williams"
---

When I arrived at the club Derek told me to go and check the plane on my own. Quite a
responsibility, but if I were ever to fly solo I'd need to be confident I could run
through the checklists without anyone else double-checking. I made my way out to the apron
and started the external checks. I was in a different plane today, still a Piper PA-28-140
Cherokee, but one with the registration G-AXTL. It was an older plane that had been out of
service while it was fitted with a new engine. It was so new the oil was almost
translucent, making it hard to read the dipstick.

Derek joined me after I'd finished the checks and asked if I'd seen the key, "No" I said,
this was a problem! A little investigation led to the discovery the previous student had
taken the keys with her after her lesson. We had to wait an age for he to return to the
club with them, Derek was not best pleased. We were finally on the move an hour after my
lesson was supposed to have started.

![Piper PA-28-140 Cherokee (G-AXTL)](/img/2015-08-15-day-9-01.jpg)

Some of the controls in this older plane were in different places than I was used to, the
trim was not a wheel between our two seats, but a rotating handle above our heads (much
like the handle for an old sunroof in a car). There were also no breaks on the rudder
pedals, all the breaking had to be done with the hand-break.

We were given permission to take-off, I applied full power and started rolling down the
runway, but for some reason I was having trouble keeping the aeroplane on the centreline,
then once in the air I was still drifting to the left when I should have been tracking the
runway as if following an extended centreline away from the airport. The wind may have
been pushing me, nevertheless, I need to work on this.

We turned towards Cheddar Reservoir and as we were passing over the Mendips the Tower
asked me to switch to Bristol Radar and said goodbye. Derek was giving me more and more to
do in the cockpit so asked me to talk to them. I changed frequency and made contact:

> Bristol Radar, Golf Alfa X-ray Tango Lima with you, squawk five zero seven zero.

The reply came back:

> Golf Alfa X-ray Tango Lima, Bristol Radar, good afternoon to you. It's a basic service
> on leaving controlled airspace. Lookout for gliders out of Halesland.

Once again I wasn't ready, didn't write anything down on my knee-board, panicked, looked
at Derek and whimpered slightly. He told me what to say:

> Basic on leaving, copy the gliders, Golf Alfa X-ray Tango Lima.

Once clear of Bristol's controlled airspace we climbed up to 3,500 feet and ran through
the HASELL check I learnt [two weeks ago](/2015/08/01/day-8/), here it is again:

 * **H**eight - Sufficient to recover by 3,000 feet
 * **A**irframe - Brakes off, flaps as required
 * **S**ecurity - Harness secure, no loose items in cockpit
 * **E**ngine - Temperatures and pressures within limits
 * **L**ocation - Clear of built up areas, airfields, controlled airspace, etc.
 * **L**ookout - 180&deg; left and right clearing turns to check for other aircraft

Then Derek talked me through a power-off stall, exactly the same as last lesson. Reduce
power to idle, then raise the nose to maintain hight, keeping on lifting the nose until
our speed gets critically low. The controls will become sloppy, the stall warner may
sound, then the aeroplane will start to shudder. These are all signs we are about to stall
and should take action to ensure we don't actually stall, except today as we're learning
how to recover. After the plane has stalled push the stick forwards **BUT ONLY JUST BELOW
THE HORIZON** not fully forwards like [last time](/2015/08/01/day-8/)!

Now it was my turn. We climbed back to 3,500 feet, ran through the HASELL check and
reduced power to idle. Then, once in the stall I tentatively pushed forward on the stick
and made sure we didn't dive towards an early grave. Not surprisingly Derek told me off
for being too slow and reminded me that it was incredibly important to get the speed back
to 60 knots with the nose below the horizon. We tried it again and this time I was
starting to get the hang of it.

Then we tried stall recovery with power, which is where you push the nose below the
horizon and apply full power. This is how you would always recover from a stall unless the
engine had failed. Finally, Derek talked me through how to avoid a spin. When the
aeroplane stalls, one wing can stall before the other, banking the plane. When this
happens you mustn't try and lift the wing as you could put the plane into a spin, instead
you should put down opposite rudder. We tried this a few times, but the neither wing would
fall before the other. I felt I understood the principles of how to avoid a spin, so Derek
called it a day. This map shows our route, as you can see there are lots of turns as we
practice a stall, recover, then turn around to avoid haxards below.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="/maps/2015-08-15-day-9-lesson-6-map.html" frameborder="0"></iframe>

As we were lining up on our descent back to the airport Derek talked me through the
landing phases. Flying down the runway's extended centreline we maintain speed with the
stick and height with the throttle. This sounds counter intuitive, but is designed to keep
the plane in the correct attitude. If you want to increase speed you push the nose
forward, to slow down you pull back. To increase the descent rate (make it steeper) you
reduce power, to decrease the descent rate (make it shallower) you add power. Once over
the runway piano keys (the white marks at the threshold) power is reduced to idle and the
nose raised to flair the wings, the trick being to try and not let the plane land, the
speed will reduce and finally touch-down smoothly on the tarmac.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/PEi76V9j76U" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Derek was pleased with my progress and said next lesson we'd start circuits.

#### TOTAL FLYING HOURS = 6.9