---
layout:     post
title:      "Day 37 - Lesson 18"
subtitle:   "Circuits in crosswinds"
date:       2016-02-27
author:     "Owain Abraham-Williams"
---

 * Backtrack, should use all of runway, for expediency we don't.
 * Most useless thing in aviation is runway behind you.
 * If you had an engine failure on take off you could still land if you have runway left. If you take off from half way you may not have runway left.
 * Turn aileron into wind when taking off with a cross wind.
 * Keep it tight on first circuit for commercial traffic. 1st landing is quite good. I feel chuffed.
 * Second circuit we have to orbit at the end of downwind as we're number 3 in traffic.	Crosswind keeps pushing us in orbit and I have to continually correct.
 * The second landing is "not bad" but I'm finding it incredibly difficult to account for the wind, kick straight, flare and land in such a short time frame.
 * On the third landing Derek suggests using just two stages of flap as it can be easier with a crosswind.
 * The fourth landing was awful, I was all over the place and rounded out much too high and kicked straight too early so the wind blew us off the centreline.
 * On the fifth circuit my heading wasn't correct and I was converging on the runway. The approach wasn't good either and Derek took control to show me how it's done. The wind caught us right at the end and Derek showed how to correct for this.
 * The sixth landing was crap, on climb-out I told Derek I was disappointed and he said not to worry. Tomorrow you'll be fine.
 * Derek said the best way to learn to fly was to have a lesson once or twice a day for a month. It's been a month since I did my first solo!
 * The seventh and last landing was okay, but the wind changed just before touch down.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/GAAeBQ-gmj4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

    TAF EGGD 270454Z 2706/2806 06012KT 9999 FEW020 SCT045=

    METAR EGGD 270850Z AUTO 05013KT 9999 OVC048 02/M03 Q1009=

#### TOTAL FLYING HOURS = 19.7

#### SOLO FLYING HOURS = 0.4