---
layout:     post
title:      "Day 66 - Lesson 36"
subtitle:   "Qualifying Cross Country"
date:       2016-07-05
author:     "Owain Abraham-Williams"
---

 * The weather forecast for this week was looking fairly good.
 * I spoke with my team in the office and arranged to have a day off at short notice if the flying club could find a slot for me during the week.
 * I phoned the club yesterday and the Garry, the ops manager, worked a miracle for me by shifting schedules and arranging for me to have G-AXTL for the day.
 * The aeroplane was flying first thing, but I could have it from 11am onwards. Kevin, one of the other instructors at the club, agreed to sign me off on my qualify cross country
 * The weather this morning was looking great and indeed the club phoned to say the same. So I drove out to the airport.
 * I got there just after 10am and started working through my PLOG, putting in adjustments for the forecast wind.
 * Once completed, I compared my PLOG with the one generated by SkyDemon and was thrilled to find only a few degrees difference and all the timings were spot on.
 * Kevin briefed me, going through procedures if I get onto any difficulty and reassuring me that it was always better to turn around, or land at another airfield than press on if the weather deteriorated.
 * He expressed slight concern at the cloud base at Cardiff and checked my route to find out the highest points over the Welsh hills.
 * It all looked okay, but Kevin again reminded me not to fly in cloud and to orbit until it clears if necessary.
 * I gathered all my kit, flight bag, aeroplane technical log, spare headset, go-bag (containing the 

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-conversation="none" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr"><a href="https://twitter.com/AnturGyffrous">@AnturGyffrous</a> I heard you en route Swansea sounding very professional on the RT</p>&mdash; Bristol &amp; Wessex (@Bristol_Wessex) <a href="https://twitter.com/Bristol_Wessex/status/750393635435339776">July 5, 2016</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

    METAR EGGD 050950Z AUTO 30010KT 9999 BKN025 15/10 Q1019=

    METAR EGFF 050950Z AUTO 30012KT 9999 BKN020 OVC035 16/11
               Q1020=

    TAF EGGD 251056Z 2512/2612 27009KT 9999 SCT020
             TEMPO 2512/2519 7000 SHRA
             PROB30 TEMPO 2512/2517 3000 +SHRA BKN009 BKN025CB
             PROB30 2610/2612 BKN014=

#### TOTAL FLYING HOURS = 44.3

#### SOLO FLYING HOURS = 10.2